FREYA-1690 Add ADR for dashboards visualisation tool (#36)
ScilifelabDataCentre/swedish-pathogens-portal: doc/architecture/decisions/0003-visualisation-tool-for-dashboards.md

# 3. Visualisation tool for Dashboards

**Date:** 2025-11-13

## Status

Accepted

## Context

In Swedish Pathogens Portal, we develop and manage multiple dashboards. Each dashboard presents unique (and sometime multiple) plot. To support data visualization needs, we evaluated two main options for generating and displaying plots:

- Plotly _(integrated directly within the Django app)_

- Apache Superset _(as an external visualization service)_

The main goal was to find a solution that provides flexibility, ease of integration, and sufficient control over how plots are generated and displayed.

## Decision

We decided to use **Plotly** as the primary plotting library for generating visualizations for our dashboards.

**Rationale:**

- **Flexibility and Control:** Plotly allows full programmatic control over plot generation directly in Python, which fits well with our existing Django backend and development workflow.

> - **Simplicity of Integration:** Since our current requirements are modest, embedding Plotly charts directly within Django templates avoids the overhead of managing a separate visualization service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Simplicity of Integration:** The overhead of managing a separate visualization service is not outweighed by our current limited visualisation needs, thus we've opted to simply embed Plotly charts within our Django templates

```

**Considered Alternatives:**

- **Apache Superset:**

    - _Pros:_ Robust visualization platform, role-based access control, built-in dashboarding features.

    - _Cons:_ Adds operational overhead (requires a separate service), less flexible for embedding custom plots in Django templates, and our current visualization needs do not justify the added complexity.

> ## Consequences

Author: I tried to, but I couldn't come up with that (I am not good with these kinda stuff 😅). So please feel free to suggest.

# 3. Visualisation tool for Dashboards

**Date:** 2025-11-13

## Status

Accepted

## Context

Within the Swedish Pathogens Portal we develop and manage multiple dashboards. Each dashboard presents unique (and sometimes multiple) plots. To support data visualisation needs, we have evaluated two main options for generating and displaying plots:

- Plotly _(integrated directly within the Django app)_

- Apache Superset _(as an external visualization service)_

The main goal was to find a solution that provides flexibility, ease of integration, and sufficient control over how plots are generated and displayed.

## Decision

We decided to use **Plotly** as the primary plotting library for generating visualizations for our dashboards.

**Rationale:**

- **Django Alignment:** Plotly integrates seamlessly with Django's template system and can be rendered server-side, maintaining our Django-based architecture.

    **Implementation Approach:**

>     - Plots can be generated on the backend using the plotly python package.

Reviewer 2: Looks good. As this approach needs plotly dependency. Should we a line something like **_Plotly dependencies will be added in PR #38_**

Author: I think in general it is better to not not link futuristic PR (i.e. not merged yet, as it might change), but old merged/closed PR can be referred for relevance.

I think for this particular instance we can skip it 🙂
